[Blog]: move the KV, not the work - P2P cache sharing in llm-d (#458)
llm-d/llm-d.github.io: blog/2026-08-15_p2p-kv-cache-sharing-llm-d.md

reduced mean TTFT by 67%, reduced p90 TTFT by 77%, and increased throughput
2.7x.

:::

This is not a universal speedup. When routing already produces a local hit,
P2P correctly does nothing. When locality conflicts with load balance or
serving topology, it can replace seconds of repeated computation with a peer
transfer. The operating principle is simple: **local hits first; portable
reuse when locality breaks.**

The rest of this post answers four questions: how expensive is a pull; whether
it improves load-balanced serving; whether it preserves session history across
prefill/decode (P/D) roles; and when it should stay inactive.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Gap: Prefix Caches Are Per-Pod

Shared system prompts, common documents, agentic loops, and multi-turn
conversations all repeat long prefixes. Reusing their KV skips a large portion
of prefill work, reduces time to first token (TTFT), and leaves more GPU cycles
for decode. For more background, see
[KV-Cache Wins You Can See](https://llm-d.ai/blog/kvcache-wins-you-can-see).

llm-d already improves reuse in two ways. Prefix-aware routing sends requests
to pods that hold their prefixes. KV offloading keeps copies in a larger CPU

> tier, and a filesystem backend can extend that tier to shared storage for

Reviewer: **local** or shared storage

Author: Right, the backend takes any mounted filesystem. Changed to "local or shared storage".

generated by a decoder, compute only the new portion, and continue the normal
P/D flow. No application change is required.

| Situation | P2P behavior |
|---|---|
| Placement finds a local prefix | Stays idle; moving zero bytes is optimal |
| Load balancing selects another pod | Pulls the prefix instead of recomputing it |
| A later P/D turn needs decode-generated history | Moves that history to the prefill worker |

## What We Measured

We evaluated four models, from an 8B dense model to a 753B wide-EP MoE, across
aggregated and P/D-disaggregated deployments. The experiments make two kinds
of claims. In an isolated A/B, P2P is the only policy difference. In a
system-policy comparison, placement or the CPU offload stack changes with it,
so the result belongs to the complete serving policy.

The three anchor results below establish the transfer economics, the clean
load-spill payoff, and the P/D session-continuity payoff. The document Q&A and
smaller-model experiments then show where the same mechanism appears under
different serving policies.

### 1. Price the Transfer Before Using It

Pulling is useful only when it costs less than recomputing. The crossover

> depends on the model, KV representation, hardware, and network, so it must be

Reviewer: what's about the GPU load - does this being influenced as part of the decision?

Author: The pull-vs-recompute decision itself is a static token-lead threshold (`minCachedTokenDelta`); live GPU load is not an input to whether we pull. Load does shape both ends of the transfer, though. The destination goes through the regular load-aware placement scorers, and source selection is load-aware (llm-d/llm-d-router#2032): peers within one block of the best cached count are sampled with weight `1/(1 + waiting queue)`, so a deeply-queued producer is avoided while a strictly better-cached peer still wins. Added a sentence on the source side to the mechanism section.

produces different block hashes and silently degrades P2P to zero matching
transfers.

:::

The [P2P KV Cache Sharing guide](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/tree/main/guides/p2p-kv-cache-sharing)
carries the deployment manifests, CPU-tier sizing, compatibility rules,
verification gates, calibration workload, and complete benchmark reports.

## What's Next

The results above establish the basic economics and two production-shaped
payoff cases. The next step is to measure P2P under fleet changes and traffic
patterns that create locality breaks dynamically:

* **Hot-prefix skew.** Drive a non-uniform prefix distribution that
  concentrates work on a few cache owners, then measure per-worker prefill
  balance and p99 TTFT with load-aware placement and P2P.
* **Scale-out warmup.** Add a cold replica under steady shared-prefix traffic
  and compare how quickly it reaches useful TTFT and cache-hit levels with and
  without peer pulls.
* **Agentic burst fan-out.** Fan a parent session's repository-scale context
  out to several sub-agents at once, then measure tail latency, source load,
  and how well concurrent pulls preserve the reuse advantage.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe also Prefetch from CPU/remote CPU before the request arrives...

Author: Added a prefetch bullet to the list. Overlapping the transfer with idle time instead of the request's critical path is probably the biggest remaining win for the multi-turn case.

---
title: "Move the KV, Not the Work: P2P Cache Sharing in llm-d"
description: "When load balancing or serving topology separates a request from its cached prefix, llm-d can move the KV from a peer instead of recomputing it."
slug: p2p-kv-cache-sharing-llm-d
date: 2026-08-15T09:00

authors:
  - niliguy
  - liranschour
  - maroonayoub-redhat

tags: [blog, kv-cache]
# TODO: consider adding a dedicated p2p tag to tags.yml
---

# Move the KV, Not the Work: P2P Cache Sharing in llm-d

A request arrives and its 48K-token prefix is already sitting in a KV cache,
but the pod holding it is busy. Route the request to the cache owner and it
queues behind that pod's backlog; route it to an idle pod and that pod spends
seconds recomputing work the cluster already did. Waiting and recomputing are
both wrong answers. P2P (peer-to-peer) KV cache sharing adds the third

> option: send the request to the best pod for load, and move the finished KV

Reviewer 2: nit, can we use endpoint instead of pod since a pod may not always represent a serving instance (in multi-node setups for example)

Author: Addressed in b5ec294. Agreed, and it matters beyond the nit: the GLM deployment in this post routes to DP-rank endpoints (two pods per role, DP-8), so per-pod is literally wrong for our own headline result. The technical sections and the section heading now use endpoint, defined at first use; the opening scene keeps the single pod image as a concrete example rather than a claim.

Reviewer 3: The commit missed this paragraph, still mentions pods.

Author: Right, conceded - that line is a mechanism statement, not scene-setting. The opening now uses endpoint throughout (aebf1dd), with the definition moved to its first use.

to it.

A busy owner is only one way locality breaks. Load balancing may select
another worker, or the required KV may have been generated by a different
serving role. In every such case the llm-d router already knows how much of a
request's prefix each candidate holds. With P2P, that knowledge becomes a
transfer instruction: route the request to the best pod overall, then tell it
where to fetch the missing prefix.

:::info[Headline result]

> On `GLM-5.2-FP8` at concurrency 64, P2P increased successful throughput with

Reviewer 2: What does "successful throughput" refer to exactly? I am not sure this is a known term.

Also, I suggest to clarify what throughput this is referring to here. Is it prefill TPS?

Author: It is completed requests per second inside the fixed 300-second measurement window - end-to-end request completions, not prefill TPS. The term is ours, so b5ec294 defines it at first use in the headline; the full accounting rule (terminal state by cutoff, drain excluded) stays in the setup details.

> both routing methods: 4.6% with approximate routing and 9.7% with precise

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
both prefix-cache routing methods: 4.6% with approximate routing and 9.7% with precise
```

routing. Precise routing with P2P led all four configurations at 11.1% above
the baseline. Across three repeat comparisons, the combined policy improved
successful throughput by 9.6% on average.

:::

This is not a universal speedup. When routing already produces a local hit,
P2P correctly does nothing. When locality conflicts with load balance or
serving topology, it can replace seconds of repeated computation with a peer
transfer. The operating principle is simple: **local hits first; portable
reuse when locality breaks.**

The rest of this post answers four questions: how expensive is a pull; whether
it improves load-balanced serving; whether it preserves session history across
prefill/decode (P/D) roles; and when it should stay inactive.

<!-- truncate -->

> ## The Gap: Prefix Caches Are Per-Pod

Reviewer 2: ditto, they are not really per -pod, they are per endpoint point (and endpoint could be a multi-node serving instance, or a rank within a pod)

Author: Renamed the section to per-endpoint and swept the technical uses in b5ec294; endpoint is defined at first use in the intro.

blocks over NIXL, the NVIDIA Inference Xfer Library. The scheduler describes
the operation as a pull because the consumer requests it; after the lookup
handshake, the producer performs the data-path write. Neither GPU performs the
peer-to-peer copy, so serving a peer costs the producer CPU memory bandwidth
and network capacity, not GPU compute. An instrumented GLM run below verifies
that the router selected a remote source and the engine completed the peer
transfer. A normal miss falls back to computation.

<div style={{textAlign: 'center', margin: '20px 0'}}>
  <img src="/img/blogs/p2p-kv-cache/architecture.png" alt="Architecture diagram showing the EPP selecting a destination and KV source, with NIXL moving matching blocks between peer CPU tiers" style={{width: '100%', height: 'auto'}} />
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>The EPP selects the destination and source; the sidecar passes that decision to the engine; NIXL moves matching blocks CPU-to-CPU.</em></p>
</div>

The router's Endpoint Picker (EPP) supplies the source decision from its
prefix index. It compares the peer with the most cached tokens against the pod

> selected to run the request. If the peer's lead is large enough to beat the

Reviewer 2: "peer's lead"? did this mean "peer's prefix match length"?

Author: Almost - it is the cached-token delta: how many more prefix tokens the best peer holds than the selected destination, not the absolute match length. A peer with a long match but no lead over the destination is not worth a transfer. Reworded in b5ec294 and named the threshold (`minCachedTokenDelta`).

measured transfer crossover, the EPP names that peer as the KV source; a tie
or self-match stays local. Among near-tied holders, the EPP samples the

> source by load, weighting peers inversely to their waiting-queue depth, so

Reviewer 2: IIUC, this is referring to how we pick a source/peer when multiple of them have close prefix match lengths; if so, why does waiting queue depth matter for picking the source (I assume waiting-queue is the vllm metric for the number of requests sent to the server and waiting in the queue, not the number of transfer requests)?

Author: Correct on both counts - it is the tie-break among holders within one block of the best match, and the weight is the engine's waiting-queue depth from the metrics scrape (`1/(1 + waiting)`), so it measures serving pressure, not transfer load. Serving a pull costs the producer CPU memory bandwidth and NIC, and the queue is the live proxy we already have; the effect we need is that concurrent pulls spread across producers instead of converging on the best-known holder. Counting in-flight transfer sessions would be the more direct signal and is not an input today. b5ec294 clarifies the proxy framing in the text.

complete wide-EP routing policy under saturation, and measure the P/D
session-continuity payoff. The document Q&A and smaller-model experiments then
show where the same mechanism appears under different serving policies.

### 1. Price the Transfer Before Using It

Pulling is useful only when it costs less than recomputing. The crossover
depends on the model, KV representation, hardware, and network, so it must be
measured rather than assumed. A fresh prefix in these experiments means a
newly salted token sequence that is seeded on the source and absent from the
consumer before the timed request.

<details>
<summary>Setup: a single pod pair, KV source injected directly, no router in the path</summary>

The driver seeds a fresh prefix on the source pod and requests it on the
consumer, injecting the KV source into the request rather than letting the
router decide. This measures the transfer itself rather than any placement
policy.

</details>

On `openai/gpt-oss-120b` with H200 GPUs, the pull won at every measured prefix
length, so the crossover sits below the smallest measured prefix of 2K tokens.
The gap also widens with length: the transfer moves bytes at network

> bandwidth, linear in prefix size, while recompute pays prefill FLOPs per token

Reviewer 2: perhaps mention the network bandwidth, the theoretical and achieved? was this done over RDMA/IB?

Author: Yes - CPU-to-CPU over NIXL (UCX) with `rdma/ib` devices on both pods; b5ec294 adds that to the setup details. I would rather not quote a theoretical-vs-achieved bandwidth: these are wall-clock pull times including the lookup handshake, and the test did not record per-transfer bytes, so any GB/s figure would be inferred rather than measured. The guide states RDMA is the measured configuration and recommends deriving `minCachedTokenDelta` from a crossover measured on your own fabric.

starts on fresh engine pods and uses the same 300-second admission window plus
a 120-second drain. Only requests that reach a terminal state by 300 seconds
enter the result, so this is a matched saturation snapshot rather than a
measurement through full workload completion.

The repeated baseline is calibrated approximate routing without P2P. The
candidate combines DP-aware precise cache-location data with peer retrieval
using a 2,048-token pull threshold. All four configurations use the same
calibrated prefill capacity and 55-second affinity-penalty budget.

The 2,048-token threshold is below the separate 12,288-token crossover
recommendation. It describes the measured policy, not a production tuning
recommendation.

</details>

The four-way comparison is one saturation snapshot. The repeat comparisons
test whether the combined policy holds.

<div style={{textAlign: 'center', margin: '20px 0'}}>
  <img src="/img/blogs/p2p-kv-cache/glm-c64-policy-comparison.png" alt="Bar chart comparing successful throughput for approximate and precise routing, each with and without P2P, in the GLM C64 comparison" style={{width: '100%', height: 'auto'}} />

>   <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>P2P improves successful throughput with either routing method. The combination of precise routing and P2P carries the most work.</em></p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>P2P improves successful throughput with either routing method. The combination of precise routing and P2P delivers the best performance.</em></p>
```

---

> title: "Move the KV, Not the Work: P2P Cache Sharing in llm-d"

Reviewer 3: Any title alternatives? "work" is vague.

Author: Retitled in 31af0ca: "Pull, Don't Recompute: Peer-to-Peer KV Cache Sharing in llm-d" - names the operation and the mechanism, no acronym, no "work".
